.\" Man page for pmlogsynth
.\" Generated 2026-03-02
.TH PMLOGSYNTH 1 "March 2026" "pmlogsynth 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pmlogsynth \- generate synthetic PCP archives from declarative YAML profiles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pmlogsynth
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR]
[\fIPROFILE\fR]
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B pmlogsynth
[\fB\-\-config\-dir\fR \fIDIR\fR]
\fB\-\-list\-profiles\fR
.br
.B pmlogsynth
\fB\-\-list\-metrics\fR
.br
.B pmlogsynth
\fB\-\-validate\fR
[\fB\-C\fR \fIDIR\fR]
\fIPROFILE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pmlogsynth
reads a YAML workload profile and writes a valid PCP version 3 archive
(\fI.0\fR, \fI.index\fR, \fI.meta\fR) that can be consumed by standard PCP
tools such as
.BR pmval (1),
.BR pmrep (1),
.BR pmlogcheck (1),
and
.BR pmlogdump (1).
No running
.B pmcd
is required, and no root access is needed.
.PP
The profile specifies a hostname, a duration, an interval, one or more
phases with workload stressors (CPU, memory, disk, network), and an optional
named hardware profile that determines the instance topology (number of CPUs,
disk devices, and network interfaces).
.PP
The default subcommand is
.BR generate ,
so
.B pmlogsynth profile.yaml
is equivalent to
.BR "pmlogsynth generate profile.yaml" .
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Global Options
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help and exit.
.SS Generate Options
.TP
\fIPROFILE\fR
Path to the YAML workload profile file (required).
.TP
.BI \-o " PATH" ", \-\-output " PATH
Output archive base name.
The tool writes
.IB PATH .0 ", " PATH .index ", and " PATH .meta .
Default:
.IR ./pmlogsynth-out .
.TP
.BI \-\-start " TIMESTAMP"
Archive start time.
Accepts ISO\ 8601 (\fI2024-01-15T09:00:00Z\fR) or human-readable
(\fI"2024-01-15 09:00:00 UTC"\fR) format.
Default: now \- \fImeta.duration\fR (archive ends approximately now).
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print per-sample metric values to stderr as the archive is written.
.TP
.B \-\-validate
Validate the profile only; do not write any files.
Exits 0 on success, 1 on validation error.
Incompatible with
.BR \-o ,
.BR \-\-start ,
.BR \-\-force ,
and
.BR \-\-leave\-partial .
.TP
.B \-\-force
Overwrite existing archive files without error (suppresses exit code 2
pre-existence check).
.TP
.B \-\-leave\-partial
On failure, leave partially-written files in place and print a warning
to stderr identifying them.
By default, all partially-written files are deleted.
.TP
.BI \-C " DIR" ", \-\-config\-dir " DIR
Additional hardware profile directory (highest precedence).
All
.I .yaml
files in this directory are treated as hardware profiles.
Useful for test-specific profiles without touching
.IR ~/.pcp/pmlogsynth/profiles/ .
.SS Informational Options
.TP
.B \-\-list\-profiles
Print all available hardware profiles with source label and exit.
Respects
.BR \-C / \-\-config\-dir .
.TP
.B \-\-list\-metrics
Print all PCP metric names the tool can produce, one per line,
sorted lexicographically, and exit.
.SH YAML PROFILE FORMAT
A workload profile is a YAML document with three top-level sections.
.SS meta
.TP
.B hostname
Archive hostname (default:
.IR synthetic-host ).
.TP
.B timezone
Archive timezone string (default:
.IR UTC ).
.TP
.B duration
Total archive duration in seconds (required, positive integer).
.TP
.B interval
Sample interval in seconds (required positive integer, default: 60).
.TP
.B noise
Global multiplicative Gaussian noise level, range [0.0, 1.0] (default: 0.0).
.TP
.B mean_packet_bytes
Average packet size used for packet-count estimation (default: 1400).
.SS host
Three mutually exclusive forms:
.PP
\fBForm 1\fR — Named profile only:
.PP
.RS
.nf
host:
  profile: generic-large
.fi
.RE
.PP
\fBForm 2\fR — Named profile with overrides:
.PP
.RS
.nf
host:
  profile: generic-large
  overrides:
    cpus: 16
.fi
.RE
.PP
\fBForm 3\fR — Fully inline:
.PP
.RS
.nf
host:
  name: my-host
  cpus: 4
  memory_kb: 16384000
  disks:
    - name: sda
      type: ssd
  interfaces:
    - name: eth0
      speed_mbps: 10000
.fi
.RE
.PP
Mixing inline fields with
.B profile:
without an
.B overrides:
key is a validation error.
.SS phases
An ordered list of named time segments.
Each phase has:
.TP
.B name
Phase identifier string (required).
.TP
.B duration
Phase duration in seconds (required, positive integer).
When no phase uses
.BR repeat ,
the sum of all phase durations must equal
.IR meta.duration .
.TP
.B transition
.I instant
(default) or
.IR linear .
Linear interpolates stressor values from the previous phase's final values
to this phase's target values over the full phase duration.
The first phase cannot use
.IR linear .
.TP
.B repeat
.I daily
or an integer count.
.I daily
repeats the phase once per 24-hour period within
.IR meta.duration .
Integer repeats the phase exactly N times.
.TP
.BR cpu ", " memory ", " disk ", " network
Domain-specific stressor blocks (all fields optional).
.SS CPU stressor
.TP
.B utilization
Overall CPU utilization fraction [0.0, 1.0] (default 0.0 at compute time).
.TP
.BR user_ratio ", " sys_ratio ", " iowait_ratio
Fractions of utilization allocated to each CPU state.
Sum must not exceed 1.0.
Defaults: 0.70 / 0.20 / 0.10.
.TP
.B noise
Per-domain noise override (inherits
.I meta.noise
if absent).
.SS Memory stressor
.TP
.B used_ratio
Fraction of total RAM in use [0.0, 1.0] (default 0.50 at compute time).
.TP
.B cache_ratio
Fraction of used RAM that is page cache (default 0.30 at compute time).
.TP
.B noise
Per-domain noise override.
.SS Disk stressor
.TP
.BR read_mbps ", " write_mbps
Read and write throughput in MB/s (default 0.0 at compute time).
.TP
.BR iops_read ", " iops_write
IOPS counts (estimated from MB/s with a 64\ KB block if not specified).
.TP
.B noise
Per-domain noise override.
.SS Network stressor
.TP
.BR rx_mbps ", " tx_mbps
Receive and transmit throughput in MB/s (default 0.0 at compute time).
.TP
.B noise
Per-domain noise override.
.SH HARDWARE PROFILES
Hardware profiles define the physical/virtual host topology used to
generate per-instance metrics (per-CPU, per-disk, per-NIC).
.SS Bundled profiles
.TS
l l l l l.
Name	CPUs	RAM	Disks	NICs
_
generic-small	2	8\ GB	1× NVMe	1× 10GbE
generic-medium	4	16\ GB	1× NVMe	1× 10GbE
generic-large	8	32\ GB	2× NVMe	1× 10GbE
generic-xlarge	16	64\ GB	2× NVMe	2× 10GbE
compute-optimized	8	16\ GB	1× NVMe	1× 10GbE
memory-optimized	4	64\ GB	1× NVMe	1× 10GbE
storage-optimized	4	16\ GB	4× HDD	1× 10GbE
.TE
.SS Precedence chain (highest to lowest)
.IP 1. 4
.BI \-C / \-\-config\-dir
directory
.IP 2. 4
.I ~/.pcp/pmlogsynth/profiles/
.IP 3. 4
Bundled package data
.SS User-defined profiles
Copy a YAML file with the
.B HardwareProfile
schema to
.IR ~/.pcp/pmlogsynth/profiles/ .
It will appear with source
.I user
in
.B \-\-list\-profiles
output.
.SH SUPPORTED METRICS
.SS CPU (kernel domain)
.TP
.B kernel.all.cpu.idle
Total CPU idle ticks across all CPUs (cumulative counter, milliseconds).
.TP
.B kernel.all.cpu.steal
Total CPU steal ticks (cumulative counter, milliseconds).
.TP
.B kernel.all.cpu.sys
Total CPU sys ticks (cumulative counter, milliseconds).
.TP
.B kernel.all.cpu.user
Total CPU user ticks (cumulative counter, milliseconds).
.TP
.B kernel.all.cpu.wait.total
Total CPU iowait ticks (cumulative counter, milliseconds).
.TP
.BR kernel.percpu.cpu.idle ", " kernel.percpu.cpu.sys ", " kernel.percpu.cpu.user
Per-CPU versions of idle/sys/user ticks.
Instance names: cpu0, cpu1, … (one per
.I cpus
in the hardware profile).
.TP
.B kernel.all.load
1-minute, 5-minute, and 15-minute load averages (instantaneous float).
Instances: "1 minute", "5 minute", "15 minute".
.SS Memory (mem domain)
.TP
.BR mem.util.used ", " mem.util.free ", " mem.util.cached ", " mem.util.bufmem
Memory utilisation counters in kibibytes (instantaneous).
.TP
.B mem.physmem
Total physical RAM in kibibytes (discrete, constant).
.SS Disk (disk domain)
.TP
.BR disk.all.read ", " disk.all.write
Aggregate read/write IOPS across all disks (cumulative counter).
.TP
.BR disk.all.read_bytes ", " disk.all.write_bytes
Aggregate read/write bytes across all disks (cumulative counter).
.TP
.BR disk.dev.read_bytes ", " disk.dev.write_bytes
Per-device read/write bytes.
Instance names match
.I disk.name
fields in the hardware profile.
.SS Network (network domain)
.TP
.BR network.interface.in.bytes ", " network.interface.out.bytes
Per-interface receive/transmit bytes (cumulative counter).
.TP
.BR network.interface.in.packets ", " network.interface.out.packets
Per-interface receive/transmit packet counts (cumulative counter).
Instance names match
.I interface.name
fields in the hardware profile.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Generate a 10-minute archive with a CPU spike
.PP
.nf
pmlogsynth \-o ./out spike.yaml
pmlogcheck ./out
pmval \-a ./out kernel.all.cpu.user
.fi
.SS Validate a profile without writing files
.PP
.nf
pmlogsynth \-\-validate spike.yaml
echo "Exit code: $?"   # 0 = valid, 1 = invalid
.fi
.SS Replay a historical incident window
.PP
.nf
pmlogsynth \-\-start "2024-01-15 09:00:00 UTC" \-o ./incident spike.yaml
.fi
.SS List available hardware profiles
.PP
.nf
pmlogsynth \-\-list\-profiles
pmlogsynth \-C ./tests/fixtures/profiles \-\-list\-profiles
.fi
.SS List all producible metrics
.PP
.nf
pmlogsynth \-\-list\-metrics
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success (archive generated, validation passed, or informational command completed).
.TP
.B 1
Validation error (profile schema, constraint violation, unknown hardware profile).
.TP
.B 2
I/O error (output path not writable, output files exist without
.BR \-\-force ,
.B \-C
directory not found).
.TP
.B 3
Generation error (error during archive writing; partial files deleted unless
.B \-\-leave\-partial
is set).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.pcp/pmlogsynth/profiles/
User-defined hardware profiles directory.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pmlogcheck (1),
.BR pmval (1),
.BR pmrep (1),
.BR pmlogdump (1),
.BR pmlogimport (1)
